Cool, all right, so
let's talk about Inferring Constants.
So this is the most basic type
of inference we can do, but
it's already gonna be something useful.
So let's say we say const a = hi, and
then const b = a, and const c = b.
Nothing but constants,
very straightforward, and
I guess one string literal.
Very straightforward, but of course,
it would be quite nice to be able to say,
I would like to infer that c is a string,
even though c is just referring to b,
which is referring to a, and then a is
the one that actually was a string.
So in order to do this correctly, in order
to be able to have our compiler understand
that c's type is string, it needs to
be able to sort of thread this through.
It needs to be able to understand that the
implication of c being b, and b being a,
and a being a string is that
through the transitive property,
c should also be a string.
So it's easy enough for us as a human
to just look at that and be like, yeah,
obviously.
But this is a compiler, we need to
actually teach it how to do this.
So here's what we're gonna do.
I'm gonna call what we're gonna
use here a types database.
Different people call this different
things, probably the most correct name for
this is a union find data structure.
Union find sounds like a verb, I always
thought it was a really weird name for
data structure, so
I'm not gonna call it that in this course.
I think types database is a much
more helpful way to understand it,
because basically,
what we're making is a key value store.
The key is an ID or a type variable,
I'm using those terms interchangeably, and
then the value is the actual
type of that variable.
So that's what we're gonna call it.
But if you ever hear about people talking
about union find or there's various
different terms that people use for
this thing, like substitution table.
Then basically,
at the end of the day, conceptually,
I think a types database is the most
useful way to think about it.
Okay, so basically, what we're gonna
do first is we're gonna say, okay,
we got our types database and
there's nothing in it right now.
So the first thing we're gonna
do is we're gonna go through and
assign type variables to all of
the interesting nodes in our parse tree.
Now, when I say interesting nodes,
what I mean is we don't really care about
the equals,
that's not really a relevant part of this.
When you have curly braces,
that's relevant for scope, but
it's not really relevant for types.
For our purposes, the things that
are relevant here are a, b, c.
So a is gonna get an ID of 0, that we're
just gonna go through and assign it, and
say, all right, 0, it's a null at first.
So initially, we're gonna initialize all
these in the database to just have null
for their type because we don't
know anything about them yet.
And I'm gonna go through and refine that.
So basically, hi is going to get
its own entry in the database.
You might think, but who cares?
Obviously, it's a string, we don't need
to bother putting it in the database.
But it actually is useful to have
its own entry because quite a lot of
the operations that we're doing are going
to be done in terms of database IDs.
And so just having an id for this thing,
even though we know it's going to
end up being a string is useful.
So we'll set it as null then
immediately set it to a string later.
So that's gonna be high.
Then we have b, which is also gonna
be null, const b, c is null, and
we're all set.
Okay, so this is the initial
population of our database.
We're gonna sort of forget about c being
special or sort of like our goal for now.
At this point, we're just gonna focus on
getting the database in the state that we
want so that we can answer questions.
And then one of the questions that
we might choose to ask is what
is the type of c?
All right, so for right now,
everything is just null.
All we've done is just gone through and
just assigned these IDs to these things.
I do wanna note that in the parse tree,
it is actually useful to write down
the ID that corresponds to this database.
So in our const deco right here,
we would say, okay,
the ID that goes with
the identifier of a is gonna be 0.
And then also the ID that goes with
the expression is gonna be 1 and
we would do that for all of these.
Now the reason we wanna do this
is that it is quite common that,
especially if you're going to machine
code or in our case to web assembly.
That once you get all the way through type
checking and you get onto code generation,
you actually need to
know the types of things.
And we'll see an example of where it
becomes important that if you throw that
information away and don't have it
connected back to the parse tree.
It's very similar to the downside of not
having your original source code positions
connected except whereas that's a problem
if you're trying to report errors and
you can't connect them back to the source.
In this case it's even more serious,
which is that if you wanna actually
run the program and
you're doing ahead of time compilation.
Not having the type information at the
final stage of code generation means that
there's just some things you just
cannot actually generate the code for,
which is a much more important problem.
Okay, so
now we've assigned these type variables.
The next thing we're gonna do is we're
gonna assign some type relationships
between these two.
So what do I mean by relationships?
Well, we know that there's
a relationship between this const a and
the thing that it's assigned to,
namely, that is essentially a symlink.
It's like whatever the type is of
the other side of this equal sign.
I don't necessarily know what it is yet.
At this point, if I looked at it,
I asked you right now, drop everything and
tell me exactly what is
it Id 1 in this database.
It would be like null, I'm like,
well, that's not helpful.
But this is not about what is it at this
exact moment when I'm doing the type
checking?
The important part is that
these two are related.
So as we go through
the type-checking process,
we're gonna learn more
about these other ids.
We're gonna learn things through inference
of looking at what's the shape of them.
And also what are their
relationships to other things,
our understanding of the types of
the program is sort of going to evolve.
And that's why I like to
call this a database.
It's just like a database in that it
changes constantly as we're going through
and doing these things.
So the important thing that we wanna write
down when we're changing this from null to
something else is what I like to think of,
again, this is my terminology.
This is not what you'll find in
like compiler literature, but
I like to call this a symlink.
We're basically saying Id
0 is symlinked to Id 1.
Which basically means that anytime
we ask Id 0, hey, what's your value,
it's gonna say, I don't know, go ask 1.
Whatever one's value is,
that's what my value is,
and that's how we're
sorta making this link.
Now the term link is definitely something
you'll find in compiler literature, but
symlink to me is, I don't know,
a little bit more like [LAUGH] relatable.
So these two are now basically connected.
We have said there's
a relationship between a and hi,
which is that anytime you ask what a is,
or you ask what ID 0 is,
the answer you're gonna get is,
I don't know, go ask I did number 1.
Okay, now moving on
through our parse tree.
So we've completed that part
of our parse tree node.
Next up is this thing,
and again, was null.
This is the part where we say,
okay, what type are you?
You're a string literal.
I bet you're a string.
[LAUGH] Just write that down directly.
There's no need for a relationship here or
anything like that,
some compilers will actually,
again, because it's so
common to have writing functions in
terms of IDs, will actually have.
For example a set of hard-coded ids for
string literals and number literals and
stuff like that.
It's like, yeah, they're all the same
type, but I just want an ID so
I can work in terms of IDs.
And so in that scenario, you might see a
SimLink off to some like hard coded one of
those, or
if you don't care about performance,
which might be what we're
doing in the exercises.
Then you might go a step further and say
like, I'm gonna make a brand new one of
these every single time I want to do this
and like make the ID like SimLink to that.
But that's just kind of,
you would never do that in a production.
It's just really wasteful.
But it is pretty common to have just l
a hard coded list of okay, you got string
for string literals and number for
number literals, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And they all have hardcoded Ids that
I know about, and I can just sim link
directly to those whenever I encounter
one of those in my code, yeah.
Are those generally referred to as
the primitives of your language?
There's different names,
I've had primitives, there's like,
primary expressions,
there's a couple of relate names to them.
I do like primitives personally, but
yeah, lot of noise can go with that.
So moving on with our relationship.
So next we're on to be here and now,
an important thing to note here is
that at this point, when we're saying,
what is b sort of simlink to you?
We have a more direct answer than just
saying like b assembling to like whoever's
in this slot, because we actually
know exactly what a's id is, it's 0.
And we can know that using exactly
the same strategy that we learned
in the previous section using scopes.
This naming resolution right here is
pretty much the same algorithm that we
went through previously, except now we're
doing it in terms of types rather than in
terms of, name declarations.
So you can imagine that as we're going
along here, we could have a scope set,
just like we did previously, and say that
we're going to put a in the scope set, but
it's not just gonna be a set.
It's actually gonna be a map.
And that map is gonna say,
if I go ask you what's the value of a,
I'm not just gonna say yes or
no, a is in scope.
I'm actually gonna take it a step further
and say, you know what the value of a is?
It's 0 right here.
A is associated with that ID of 0, which
means that as we're traversing these parse
tree nodes, when we see an a in the lookup
position, so it's not a declaration,
this is a lookup,
we're saying like what is a?
I can answer that question.
First of all, a was already defined.
Remember how I said it's really convenient
to already know that these are all going
to be defined and I'd have to deal with
them right here, that's exactly why.
If we didn't have that naming step,
then when we got here,
we would have to be like, well,
now we have to handle the possibility in
the middle of type checking that
this thing was not already declared.
But thankfully, in our compiler,
we halt before that would have happened.
So we know that this is going to work and
we also know in this particular example
that when I go and ask the scope, hey,
what is the current
value of a in the scope?
It's gonna say, a, that's type ID 0.
So there's no need for
a more special formal relationship here.
I can just basically directly say look,
b is just simply straight to 0.
So even though this one is we're simply to
the other thing, whatever's on the other
side of me, it's well, I already have an
ID for the thing on the other side of me.
So I'm just going to send
link directly to that.
Basically the same story with c.
So when we get to c we're okay,
what is c gonna be similar to?
And c is, well, the other side of this
is something that we also have in scope,
namely b, so
I'm just gonna symlink directly to that.
Okay, so
now we have populated our database.
We have assigned all
the type relationships.
We've said that zero, which is a back
here, like const a, that is basically,
hey, I don't know what my type is.
Go ask 1, 1 is like, I'm a string.
If you go ask const b what its type is,
it's gonna say it's I'm some link to 0.
So that's a,
we can sort of draw this out visually and
say if we're gonna go back
to our original goal here.
Which is we wanna infer
that c is a string,
the way that we can do that is say, okay,
well, first off, what is c's type ID.
And, okay, c is type ID 3.
Well, that's right here
in our database table.
So we go ask our types database,
what in fact is the current type of c?
And it says, well, I'm whatever 2 is.
So then we go and ask 2,
okay, what are you?
And 2 says, I'm whatever 0 is.
And we say, okay, what is 0?
And it says, I'm whatever 1 is.
Then we go to 1, and
it says, I'm a string.
So we did it.
[LAUGH] That's the answer.
[LAUGH] Several hops later, we have gone
all the way from initially saying a equals
high, b equals a, c equals b.
What is the type of c?
To answering that question through
our database with c as a string.
Hooray, type inference
on a very basic level.
Okay, so to kind of like recap what
we have done to get up to this point.
So the first thing we did was
we did our tokenization phase.
And that was where we started with
a string and we're just like, cool,
let me make some tokens.
The tokens kind of look like
this in memory representation.
We have an object with like type as const,
the value is null because there's no
particular payload to this token,
its position is zero, we're just
writing that down for error messages.
Then we get another token
that's like an identifier.
Its value is a, position is 6, that's etc.
Then we turn that stream of tokens into
parse tree nodes which are nested.
And so then we get things
like this const declaration,
which has the ID of a and then a value,
the type of string and a value of hi.
And then now what we're doing
is we're actually sort of
annotating the parse tree nodes.
We're expanding them, we're giving them
a little bit more information by making
these into typed parse tree nodes.
And this is that initial step that I
talked about, when we're going through and
just handing out IDs to everyone,
we just write down what is your type ID?
And at that stage, they were all null.
So when we're going through the tree nodes
and saying you get a typeId of zero, and
you get a typeId of 1, etc, you Initially,
that's not even useful information.
It's like, yeah, your type id is 0,
if I go look at the database it's null,
how useful was that?
Well, the answer is it's quite useful
if you are about to do is to go
populate all those database tables,
database rose by traversing
the first three nodes and
assigning relationships between them.
Worth noting that you don't have to
do this type ID assignment stage
in type checking.
So I mentioned earlier that when
you're finished with parsing and
you're moving on to name resolution.
You could do this canonicalization thing
where there's some extra information you
can put in there.
In Rocks Compile,
this is actually where we do this.
So in the parse tree nodes,
we don't have any type typeIds.
And then when we translate from
parse tree nodes to canonical node,
which do the string and
turning and the name resolution.
One of the other things we do during
canonization is that we add these,
we go through and
assign type variables to everybody so
that they can look them up later.
And so why do we actually need this?
Right now we don't.
Much like with the position
that we saw earlier,
I've mentioned that we write this down and
it is useful in various scenarios,
but none of the scenarios we've seen so
far are actually making use of it.
We're just kind of writing it down and
mentioning it, but
not actually getting any value out of it.
I would say this is in the same boat right
now and that we're writing it down and
I wanna note that we're writing it down.
But we're not actually gonna make use
of this until the very last section of
the course, that's the part where we once
again, will traverse these nodes, and
then we're going to spit out WebAssembly.
And WebAssembly actually cares about
what is the final concrete type
of these things.
And there are some things like string
literals where we just know it's
very obvious.
But there's also some things where if
we haven't already connected the type
information back to the node,
we see the node, and we're like,
I don't know what to tell you why
that suddenly you need to type, but
I don't know what the type is and
this is how we get that.
This way back at the very beginning of,
[LAUGH] outside members.
And then so from this type first three
notes which had these ids connected to
things they disable.
We basically went through and
assigned relationships until we
ended up with this much more
useful populated table.
And the only way that we did this was just
by traversing these parse tree nodes and
just being like, okay, what are you?
You're a const echo, and here is your ID,
and then here's the thing that you're
assigned to, and here's the idea
of that thing, and yada yada.
And so
if you were wondering what is the like?
Literally, what does the code look
like that actually does this?
Basically you can implement this
database as just an array in JavaScript.
That's totally acceptable and
that's, in fact,
what we're going to do in the exercises.
So you literally can say when I'm coming
along here, like DB bracket zero,
I'm just initializing these
slots in the array to null, and
that's all the ceremony there is to it.
So when I say types database,
I mean kind of like an array.
We're not talking like PostgreSQL or
anything like that.
As far as representing the sim
links versus concrete types, again,
I'm trying to go for
a pretty simple representation here.
So what we'll see in the exercise is that
I literally use the term symlink to talk
about like, what is this?
Don't ask me, go ask ID number one.
So that's just an object
of what says symlink:1.
And then if it's not a symlink,
if it's a concrete type,
then we actually use the term concrete and
then say what its concrete type is.
This primitive type is another word for
that.
I use the term concrete basically to
sort of contrast it with symlink.
So symlink is sort of like,
I don't know, go ask this thing.
Concrete type is like, we know the answer,
the answer is this, exactly this thing.
It's a string for sure, it's a number for
sure, it's a Boolean, etc.
And then, yeah, more and
more symlinks there.